good evening I'm Judy Woodruff
and I'm hari Sreenivasan on the
NewsHour tonight
outrage and sorrow another video
of a police officer shooting a
black man
surfaces less than 48 hours
after a Louisiana shooting then
FBI director
James colt is grilled on the
Hillary Clinton email
investigation
defending his recommendation not
to prosecute the presidential
candidate and
continuing our fault line series
we go inside the Eastern
European nation of
estonia where heightened
tensions with Russia are making
citizens fear that
aggression may turn military
when training has started
several print mine
family member dies da easy time
to pack up our families put on a
ship's and
somewhere safe place
and get ready for war
all that and more on
tonight's PBS Newshour
police are again under scrutiny
tonight over the deadly use of
force against
minorities that's after the
second fatal shooting in as many
days
this time it happened in the
town of Falcon Heights Minnesota
just outside of
st. Paul the state capitol
and didn't deserve to die
emotions ran high outside the
governor's mansion in st. Paul
this morning
why do we have to keep fired
we're human it's time for us as
a people to
connective Lee come together and
began to work on these issues
unafraid not
fearing anything I anybody in
this latest incident an officer
shot 32 year
old for Lando Castile in his car
after pulling him over for a
broken taillight
casteels girlfriend diamond
Reynolds then live stream the
aftermath on
facebook with her young
daughter in the backseat
the victim could be seen
bloodied and slumped in his seat
as Reynolds narrated
the Castilla was legally
carrying a gun license to carry
he was trying to get out his ID
is Wally out his pocket and you
let the officer
know that he was we had a
firearm and he was reaching for
his wallet and the
officer just shot him in his are
more and more people view the
chilling video
overnight and hundreds of
protesters gathered outside the
governor's mansion
in st. Paul
by morning governor Mark Dayton
a Democrat announced he's
seeking a
federal civil rights
investigation but too many in
the crowd including the
Reverend Danny Givens those
words rang hollow at that table
with you
I just want to access code it
was only suspect the people's
name
I just want to be real
casteels girlfriend was also at
the rally and directed her
frustration at
police they did not check for
palm on the scene of the crime
they did not make sure that he
was breathing they instantly
rush their
colleague off to the side where
they confident him this
afternoon the
governor stepped up his
condemnation of police conduct
in the incident with this
have happened if those of
passengers the driver the pastor
wait
I don't think it would so I'm
forced to confront and I think
all of us and
there's the reversal run this
this kind of racism exists
police officials did not
identify the officer except to
say he's been on paid
administrative leave
but friends and family of Lando
Castillo spoke of him as a
beloved cafeteria
supervisor at a school in st.
Paul a black lives matter sign
hung there today
and teachers and staff from the
school took part in the protest
at the
governor's mansion is our
community needs to hear from
everybody including
that this isn't okay we need to
make sure that all lives matter
the fact that
you know it's a traffic stop
you know things can escalate but
maybe this could have been
prevented
he was just so patient and even
when kids were coming in late or
dropping
trays or getting
jammed in that lying
you know i do I watched him and
he just was so patient and calm
with the kids
the Minnesota shooting came just
one day after a white officer in
Baton Rouge
Louisiana fatally shot out and
sterling outside a convenience
store as protests
their continued Louisiana's
governor has asked for a federal
civil rights
investigation into that killing
and a house hearing today
leading black
congressman urged FBI director
James Comey to take action
please I am a lawyer and I know
how important police i know
there's so many
great folks but mr. director
if you do nothing else
in your 2000 + days left
you have got to help us get a
hold of this issue it is so
painful in his own
statement President Obama said
the killings show again that
there is a
serious problem in relations
between police and minorities
will explore the
issue of police killings of
black suspects in greater detail
after the
news summary in the days other
news the latest trial began in
Baltimore four
police officers charged in
connection with the death of a
young black man
Freddie gray had his neck broken
while riding in a police
transport van last
year
lieutenant Brian rice is the
highest ranking of six officers
charged
he is accused of manslaughter
and other crimes for not making
sure gray was
using a seat belt
two other officers have been
acquitted and another trial
ended in a hung jury
house republicans have in
definitely put off any vote on
gun control legislation
a number of news outlets
reported today it's unclear when
party leaders can win
over enough conservatives to
pass their gun in anti-terrorism
bill
meanwhile Democrats spoke
one by one on the floor
they held photos of people
killed by guns and demanded of
vote on tightening
background checks for gun buyers
the political drama over Hillary
Clinton's
emails played out on Capitol
Hill today at a congressional
hearing FBI director
James Comey defended the
decision not to recommend the
criminal charges be filed
in the case and House Speaker
Paul Ryan confirmed that he has
asked the director
of national intelligence to bar
classified here briefings for
Clinton
once she becomes the Democrats
presidential nominee the
director of the
FBI just said that Hillary
Clinton recklessly mishandled
sensitive
classified information and in
three weeks when she comes out
of the
convention
she is going to get unfettered
access to the most sensitive
classified
information our government has
no way we'll have a full report
on today's
house hearing with FBI director
call me later in the program
there's word the senator Bernie
Sanders is finally ready to
endorse Hillary
Clinton for president Democrats
have been pressing Sanders and
the NewsHour
has confirmed the announcement
will come tuesday
meanwhile Donald Trump spent
today in Washington trying to
reassure
congressional Republicans he met
with members of the House and
Senate and some
former critics said
they were encouraged
I want to see if you do two
things will cast a vision
and then contrast themselves
with the Democrats lock in
and and then thirdly have fewer
unforced errors and fourthly
raise some money
also you feel better after today
to do but Trump's meeting with
senators became
heated when he attacked those
who did not support him and
warned that they
would lose reelection one of
them jeff flake of Arizona is
not actually up for
re-election this year he said
the exchange did nothing to win
him over
yeah that's life
I might want to do to talk about
a few of the concerns that we
have and and yet
i mentioned in there that I i'm
not in the nevertrump movement
I want to support our nominee I
really do but given some of the
statements that
have been made finding it
difficult trip also reportedly
called Illinois Senator
Mark Kirk a loser
later Kirk branded the candidate
a wealthy bully and a spokesman
for
Nebraska's Ben Sasse said given
the choice of trump or Clinton
the senator
believes quote this election
remains a dumpster fire in Iraq
the death toll
from Sunday's bombing in
Baghdad sword again today
it rocks Health Ministry
reported a total of two hundred
and ninety two
people have now died as a result
of the Islamic state attack the
bombing
devastated a busy market in a
mostly Shiite neighborhood
in addition to the dead more
than 200 were wounded Islamist
militants also
struck again in bangladesh
attacking attacking police at a
festival marking
the end of ramadan four people
were killed last week an assault
on a cafe
and dr. the capital left 28 dead
the Islamic state group claimed
that attack Britain may be on
the verge of
having its first female prime
minister since margaret thatcher
was ousted in
1990 ruling conservatives narrow
the field for the leadership of
their party
today - two interior minister
Theresa May and Andrea leads him
who helped to
head the campaign to leave the
European Union a final decision
is due by early
sep tember and Wall Street
struggled after crude oil
inventories came in
unexpectedly high oil prices
sank a jones industrial average
lost 22 points
to close below 17,000 896 the
nasdaq rose 17 points but the
S&P 500 dropped
about -
still to come on the NewsHour
police shootings in the
spotlight
the FBI director takes
Republican heat over his
handling of Hillary Clinton's
email server
estonian NATO exercises in a
nation under Russian threat and
much more
yeah
the police shooting of an
african-american man in
Minnesota and
the disturbing live video that
captured part of the aftermath
led to another day
of anger distress and serious
questions among them
why was lethal force used how
police respond to situations and
the growing
impact of video and social media
we explore this now with Jelani
Cobb staff
writer for The New Yorker his
latest project is a frontline
documentary
called policing the police
David cleaner is a criminal
justice professor at the
University of Missouri
st. Louis and a senior fellow at
the police foundation and AC
Lipowski a
staff writer at Wired magazine
Jelani let me start with you
like thousands if not millions
of people
today you saw that video
your initial reactions
it was just after Cara
it was amazing thing to see
someone able to maintain their
composure and the face
of this is the most horrible
circumstance that we can imagine
and to think this happened you
know just in the span of three
maybe 36 hours
after the previous video of
someone who died in an incident
with the police
it honestly was a lot to process
it David clear your reaction of
the the
video out of Minnesota is one of
the most compelling things I've
ever seen
I follow up with well what the
other gentleman just said about
trying to
process it in terms
of her composure
the fact that her daughter is
there her daughter comforting
her later on the
video opening with the
the gentleman bleeding
obviously being shot the officer
shouting it was very compelling
and very
disturbing
David staying with you for a
second there are thousands if
not hundreds of
thousands of traffic stops every
day and police around the
country figure out a
way to never get anything
to escalate to this level
what's failing in these cases
what's the training on a basic
traffic stop
well basically walk up and
identify yourself as a police
officer asked for
driver's license registration
and then you move from there in
this situation as
i understand it
the driver told the officer that
he had a CCW permit to carry a
concealed weapon
permit and it devolved from
there and trying to understand
how it got to that
point is going to be the nub of
the investigation and because
the video
starts after the shots
have been fired
we don't know what preceded it
and so I say we just need to
wait and see what
all the rest of the evidence is
regarding what happened in terms
of
pulling the trigger is you wrote
today that this live streaming
was almost like
a 911 call in the
context of police abuse
sure when you're on the other
side of police abuse / police
brutality or
police shootings you
you can't call the police which
is the natural instinct that
most people have
when you're in an
emergency situation
so now social media has really
become this lifeline for people
it's not only
there to document it so we can
see what happened after the fact
but in that
moment in that video you can see
diamond Reynolds is really
calling out for help
in that moment because she
doesn't know where else to turn
Jelani that the idea that that
that woman was literally giving
out her
address trying to get people to
come to her is this a sign that
there is a
vacuum in some way that law
enforcement agencies the
Department of Justice when
they do the Special
Investigations that there is
some sort of still a failure
there that there cannot be that
accountability that someone can
turn to
certainly and you know we've
seen this again again again in
the kind of
systemic way and you know to the
to the bigger . i think that's
here is also
something about the gun
culture of the United States
we're in we've seen the response
to you know mass shootings and
the total sum of
homicides in this country and in
the face of that a really
recalcitrant
insistence upon a kind of
fundamentalist version of the
Second Amendment yet this
person was actually guilty of
nothing more than taking the 2nd
amendment at
face value and identifying
himself as a registered weapon
holder and it results
in him being killed fatally shot
and so I think it sends a
message here that these IDs
principles really are not
made with us in mind
they don't apply to us
David cleaner you know governor
Mark Dayton even said out loud
today and and
you might have heard it in the
piece that preceded this
conversation is it
will basically what this have
happened if the driver and the
passenger was
white and the end and the
governor says no but what's the
training that police
have when it comes to racial
profiling something that the
whole country is
sensitive about these days
there's a lot of training that's
been going on around
the country united states
department of justice is putting
on implicit by a
trick place I can talk excuse me
implicit bias training for all
federal agents as i understand
it and so it's
something that is ongoing but i
would challenge the governor's
position he
knows nothing about how the
situation one down he's not
privy to the
investigative case file
the investigation is still
ongoing and to say that it was a
racially based
shooting we have no idea at this
point it may well be but we
don't know that at
this point and the evidence that
we do have in terms of the
statistics that we
have indicates that in fact the
majority of the people who were
killed across the
country by United States police
officers are white people you
know it
David staying with also booked
sorry go ahead you're lying yeah
also that's misleading to frame
it that way certainly we should
be very
cognizant of the fact that the
majority of the people in this
country who were
killed by police are white
also the majority of the
population is why when you look
at this in terms of
population share a
proportionately smaller number
of my people than the
general population to kill about
police and a proportionately
higher portion of
people of color are
and that goals
we're going to say kind of one
thing people will say
immediately is that well
the higher crime statistics
among people of color but even
when dealing with
unarmed individuals is still a
disproportionate number of
people of
color who were killed when you
look at their share of the
population
yeah according to the Washington
Post database to keep track of
this i think
in the last two years and
they've been tracking it they've
been 2.5 times as
many African
Americans killed and
as as white people are easy i
wanna i wanna bring this to you
just for a
second I did the videos change
something to the nature of the
fact that when i
saw it last night I almost found
it impossible to believe that it
was true
and then all of a sudden as it
was rolling out there were kind
of different
feelings that I was having I
think this video cuts really
deep
I mean you have a man they're
dying in the in the driver's
seat you have his
girlfriend's sitting next to him
suffering you have the police
officer
yelling out these barbaric
screams you have a little
four-year-old girl who
just witnessed a murder
suddenly comforting her mother
it's impossible not to be
sympathetic
so there's a lot of conversation
about whether these videos
should immediately
be published and I think that
that's a that's we have to
decide as a society
whether we you know want to
protect these sort of delicate
sensibilities we
have or if we want to let these
stories be shared in full side
of the story that
historically has not really been
shown and the value of social
media has always
been allowing people to go
direct to the public and sort of
sidestep the
mainstream media and I think
that's exactly what we saw here
so yes I do you
think it's changing things
Jelani what about the
possibility of a desensitizing
effect just the fact that
we're talking about two videos
and such short succession over
time does it
become almost like a drum beat
and ultimately does it change
the equation
well i don't know i think that
you know one thing that happens
with this is that
many communities have talked
about this and will not believe
so at the very
least we now have some sort of
documentary evidence of what is
actually
happening and as far as
desensitizing I mean the
majority population has been
desensitized to the suffering of
this community for since the
inception of
this country and so I don't
think that this is going to
somehow another make
someone who was concerned about
these issues kind of look
askance and say that
I can no longer
compliments what's happening
David klinger video seems to be
a reality that
every Police Department has to
deal with whether it's the video
coming out of
their body cameras and how those
body cameras are protected and
the chain of
custody on where that video is
throughout the entire process or
as we
now see more often than not
after the initial moment of the
incident someone a bystander or
in this case part
part of the victims are actually
turning to social media to turn
this on so how
to police departments around the
country kind of brace for this
prepare for this
but what they should do is they
should be telling all their
officers to assume
that you're being videoed even
if you are not wearing a body
camera you don't
have an in-car video that's
working and - uh therefore act
appropriately just as
another check to remind officers
to the to do the right thing one
of the things
that's frustrating to me is
there still some police agencies
out there that
don't understand that citizens
have an absolute lawful right to
go ahead and
video and audio record them
when they're in public space
the only issue is that we have
to negotiate or or explain to
people what
the rule set is going to be
about not interfering and I
think that that's the
the next thing that people are
going to have to understand
there's a time and a
place to step back
and take that video
you shouldn't be introducing
yourself into the event itself
I've got friends for police
officers who say that a a
sizeable number of times
when they get out of their
vehicle a crowd will surround
them and try to egg
them on so that they can get a
better a clip to put up on
YouTube and so I think
we're going to have to figure
some stuff out here but police
agency should not be
worried about the fact that the
public is monitoring them with
video and audio
recordings
all right David cleaner from the
University music Missouri st.
Louis
Jelani Cobb in The New Yorker
and see the positive wire thanks
so much for
joining us thank you
thank you thank you
yeah
we turn now to another
high-profile story of this day
where the US justice
system is being questioned
but for different reasons
they said they are dad has that
Republicans today opened a new
stage in
the debate over Hillary
Clinton's emails with the house
oversight committee I'd
say I'm here because we were
mystified and Confused
immediately Republican
chairman jason Chaffetz of Utah
challenge FBI director James
Comey over
whether the Bureau has not
Quentin off easy that the
average Joe the average
American that if they had done
what you laid out in your
statement that they'd
be in handcuffs and they might
be on their way to jail and we
probably should
and I think there is a
legitimate concern that there is
a double standard
but over five hours of testimony
call me insisted his agency was
right to recommend more charges
the
recommendation was made the way
you would want it to be by
people who didn't
give a hoot about politics but
who cared about what are the
facts
what is the law and how have
similar people all people been
treated in the
past
other Republicans like South
Carolina's trey Gowdy press the
FBI chief on
whether Clinton's previous
statements about the emails were
true
Secretary Clinton said i did not
email any classified material to
anyone on my
email there is no classified
material was that true that
there was classified
material email
Secretary Clinton said all
work-related emails will return
to the State
Department was that true
no we found work-related emails
thousands that were not returned
it's better for me homie argued
that what Quintin did may well
have been
worth some kind of punishment
but we're not prosecution as a
climb
so should have known must have
known had to know does not get
you there
you must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that they knew
they were engaged in
something that was unlawful for
you drew a distinction with a
similar case that
of General David Petraeus who
agreed to a plea deal in 20 15 /
mishandling
classified information in that
case of obstruction of justice
you have intentional misconduct
and a vast quantity of
information
he admitted he knew that
was the wrong thing to do
that is a perfect illustration
of a kind of cases to get
prosecuted
while Republicans argued that
the lack of charges was
political three Democrats
contended the politics were all
in the hearing itself despite
your impeccable
reputation for
independence and integrity
Republicans have turned
on you with a vengeance
immediately after you announced
your recommendation not to
pursue criminal
charges against Secretary
Clinton Hillary Clinton stayed
off the campaign
trail today but her press
secretary sent out a statement
saying
today's hearing knockdown
Republican falsehoods and shut
the door on
conspiracy theories about
the emails once and for all
but House Speaker Paul Ryan
believes the case is not closed
right now there are
still far more questions than
answers regarding the
investigation of Secretary
Clinton the nation's top
Republican ask for all
unclassified documents in the
investigation to be released
for the PBS Newshour
i'm lisa de Chardin
yeah
tonight our series fault
line takes us to Estonia
unlike Ukraine where we spent
the last two nights Estonia is a
member of NATO
one of the Alliance's smallest
countries but among its most
committed members
today estonian say they need no
more than ever because their
fears about a
resurgent Russia are the highest
since the country gained
independence when the
Soviet Union collapsed 25 years
ago with the help of the
Pulitzer Center on
Crisis Reporting special
correspondent Nick Schifrin
begins our report in the
city of narva literally a
stone's throw from Russia
welcome to the friendship bridge
even though things here are very
friendly at
the moment behind me is an
Estonian castle from the Middle
Ages
this is estonia's easternmost
border the norva river which
means it's the border
between NATO and
the EU and Russia
this has been called NATO's most
sensitive border Ivan the
Terrible built
the Russian castle and
of the last 300 years
Russia's occupied estonia
for 250 we we said no again
51 year-old Brigadier General
may list keeley commands the
estonian Defense
League the equivalent of the
National Guard he met me in the
occupation museum
surrounded by artifacts of the
Soviet Union occupation that
began in the
forties
so we're looking at a series of
old radios hear me and my father
we were
listening every night there was
a virgin america that reached
out behind the Iron
could when you look
at today's Russia
do you see echoes of what
we are looking at around us
I remember the joy when we
regained our independence
the message is clear we are
going to defend our liberties
our country and our
pride
to defend the country all
estonia men are conscripted but
the army only has
five thousand active
duty soldiers
so the fifteen thousand
volunteers from general keeley
commands are the real tip
of the country spear
I would like that my child is
also very pretty that's throwing
up
not bad side was born in oakland
by the phone and 51 year-old
Thomas Marva
spends his weekend's training as
a sniper his day job as CEO of a
textile
factory
you see what happens in your
brain you have to be rated
prevents Estonians
watched in horror as Crimean
celebrated Russia's annexation
and Russian soldiers
help to stabilize
eastern Ukraine
they fear estonia might be next
across the border Russia
launches military
exercises with as many as 80,000
soldiers near by sweden's hunted
for
Russian submarines believed to
have operated off its coast
Russian Jets have
buzzed American warships
premier started several friends
of mine and family members asked
hey is it time
to pack up our families put them
on ships and somewhere safe
place and get
ready for war
forty-two-year-old the Arcturian
commands estonia's Air Force
my grandfather was a officer in
the stone army before war and he
was
deported to Siberia
in order to come back
I hope that we can deter Russian
from and we're making a big
mistake again
deterring the bear
requires a lot of backup
Torian commands an Air Force
with no jets he relies entirely
on NATO and us
firepower
if Russia wanted to they could
come through very very quickly
and so our
response time must be much much
faster now 32 year old
christopher more trains
Apache pilots based in germany
for 15 years that training top
counterinsurgency for
Iraq and Afghanistan
Russia's annexation of Crimea
change the training overnight
the pilots are flexible now
immediately building this idea
of how to fight the
discipline fight
translation after a quarter
century of looking elsewhere
NATO's we focused on its
original enemy I started this 27
years ago we were
trying to fight the soviet union
colonel john meyer commands the
2nd cavalry
regiment during the Cold War the
2nd cavalry regarded the Iron
Curtain today
his troops are deployed in half
a dozen countries behind and
what has changed
over the last 27 years is that
there are nations now in eastern
and central
europe that have volunteered
to join an alliance
after Crimea estonia invited the
us to deploy a hundred and fifty
soldiers and
hold increasingly large
exercises like this
tomorrow it will announce the
deployment of a new 700 soldier
unit to Estonia is
that commitment of a unified
alliance with 28 nations that is
what deters
but after britain voted to leave
the European Union Estonians
worry about
European fortitude and they fear
the possible impact of
presidential
candidate Donald Trump many
countries are not paying their
fair share
that means we are protecting
them and they are getting all
sorts of military
protection and other things and
they're ripping off the United
States and
they're ripping you off Trump's
criticism is economic in the
early
nineteen eighties the u.s.
accounted for half NATO members
military budgets today
the u.s. accounts for three
quarters of those budgets
either they pay up including for
past deficiencies or they have
to get out and
if it breaks up NATO it breaks
up NATO we cannot allow this
very successful
alliance to fall apart because
in one case we don't want to do
anything
well Thomas <operand> fifty
</operand> Elvis has been
estonia's president for
nearly a decade
NATO's article 5 says if estonia
wherever attacked the United
States and
every NATO country would be
obliged to go to war with
estonia's attacker
if that political will is
missing in one case then the
entire enterprise falls
apart
why should Americans who are
skeptical about spending money
on the military and
other places
care about stuff so i
bought the American values
it is important for the better
world in the future that Estonia
stays free and
democratic country into
democracy spread east from here
instead of vice versa the
tyranny spreading west from here
why is this important that you
are training for this threat if
we continue
to sit back and watch one tree
fall and another country for
another good for
never taking all of Europe and
now it's literally the only
thing you have left
is the US but now they have all
the resources of all those other
countries
it's it's a dangerous mind set
to be passive and to sit back
Estonians argue unlike the vast
majority of NATO members they
meet the military
spending requirements and when
the Alliance is called they've
answered
article 5 has been invoked once
and that was by the united
states and that was in
the wake of 911 in which we went
to Afghanistan we were smack in
the middle
of Taliban land so we did it we
did our duty is the end of that
sentence that
you came to the United States is
aid you would expect United
States come near it
we fulfilled our NATO
obligations and you'd expect
made out of will fill
there's back in north along the
Russian border the Soviet War
Memorial serves as
a warning in Crimea Russia claim
authority to intervene on behalf
of
ethnic Russians and more than
ninety percent of Norma is
Russian speaking
when you come up here
you see this view what do you
think 14 year old Eagle sure is
the son of a
Russian mother and estonian
father were like pretty much
have almost the same
culture like a stone and Russia
from the castle there is no sign
of tension
Igor and much of this town wants
to keep it that way these
provocations from both
both sides
they are pretty much useless
because it's just amazing
detention even more
that's because nervous feels
calm and Estonians have it
pretty good
they make more money and the
Russian neighbors children can
work across the
EU that stability and prosperity
keeps even Russian speaking
residents
pro-european will go this region
economically it's quite well off
and
self-sufficient
judging by the office of 62
year old Vladimir Petrov
he's a Russian nationalists
you have the magnets
Putin we have Stalin but
in the have the newspaper
it seems like you're pro-russian
when i receive older people
they're familiar
with all this
it's very dear to them it
makes them feel at home
he is the chairman of the union
of Russian citizens in estonia
but even he
wants his love of Russia to
remain a long distance
relationship as you said
Russia could very quickly come
in with the people of novel
welcome that the
daily life here that's
continuing is nothing like
military intervention and
no one is hoping for that
so estonia's deterrence is our
economic enlargement and
military might
for both to work they need a
robust european union and nato
without those
alliances NATO's most sensitive
border could become its most
vulnerable for the
PBS Newshour
I mixture friend
in narva estonia
tomorrow in our final story Nick
will look at NATO's biggest
build up in
Europe since the Cold War
yeah
stay with us coming up on the
NewsHour the ominous future of
cyber warfare and
Jim Gaffigan steak on the
changing world of comedy
but first it has been a rough
two weeks in britain since the
country voted to
leave the European Union the
pound dropped to its lowest
levels in more
than three decades and the
european markets have taken hits
over concerns
about the economic impact
tonight we get a longer view and
a less alarmed one
about what it means for global
banking and financial stability
our economics
correspondent Paul Solman filed
this report from across the pond
it's part of his weekly
reporting on making sense of
financial news
Mervyn King former head of the
bank of england in his new book
the end of
alchemy King still worries that
the world banking system hasn't
reformed
itself
eight years after its excesses
led to collapse times the Old
Man River Britain
we'll be here forever rather
like money and banking we've
always had them as it
happened
he was giving me a tour of
London to make his case on the
day of the brexit
vote the oddsmakers the markets
and I at least thought Britain
would remain
as we passed a group
of upbeat remainders
I thought no problem counting is
underway of tens of millions of
votes
then came the result the
answer is we're out
so before asking you to take the
tour we check back with King to
see if the vote
had altered his analysis we
didn't talk much about the
brakes vote because it
actually the brakes it vote
isn't germane to the fundamental
challenges
dealing with our banking system
and putting on to a sound
footing
we were talking as we walked
around London about the really
important long
run issues affecting our
economist look King says when
you take the long view
the global financial system
needs the same fixes it did
before break sir
he believes his tour of London
finance therefore is as relevant
as ever
this is long bond street
title
the Badgers great book
in the eighteen seventies about
how to ensure that the
banking crisis don't occur
I have to respond to
and this was the place where
finance houses were situated
a coffee houses which
turned into banks
and trading house
and the heart of
the city of london
and his idea was the people who
worked here we just better walk
across the
street to the magma
gives the security of the
collapsible they had to the main
convenient bank
would lend the money
that rush back pal
the creditors and depositors
they wanted their money back
central banks exist to
be lenders of last resort
problem too big to fail and
that's what began
happening in England just like
America in the eighties and
nineties
here we are now in the modern
Docklands area so this is where
the banks came to
trade for the derivative
instruments of CDO squared all
the complex instruments
they were traded down here and
is a large part of the problem
that
crystallized aggressive way
because people like yourself
Bank of England the fed in the
United States couldn't keep up
with the
innovation it was going on in
places like this i will put it
differently i
think there were two
things that were going on
one was that because interest
rates were falling throughout
the world
asset prices were rising trading
look very profitable and
therefore the
leverage of the banking system
Rose very sharply leverage
meaning the ratio of the bank's
own money to the
money it borrows in the form of
deposits or short term loans so
that made the
banking system or fragile
the other thing was that what
proved very difficult and it is
always going to
be very difficult is the
businesses or particular methods
and financial
services that keep making
money year after year
are they making money because
they just good ideas and a very
successful or are
they making money because
they're very risky and I just on
the edge but people
must have realized that
was happening so how come
regulation didn't adapt to
the changing environment
it's easy with hindsight to look
back and say all these
regulations turned out
to be inadequate because it
turned out the mortgage loan
for example was riskier than was
thought beforehand but that's
the problem of
thinking in advance that you've
got a detail system that works
and then you
think all that will work then
you discover it doesn't and you
do need
something much more robust and
much more simple to prevent I
think the same
problem happening again
so King has two proposals for
preventing another breath
so this now is the Bank of
England this is the building
which has been the home
of the central bank sincerely
18th century and this is where
you were in
yes I was on the ground floor
because the governor's office is
on the ground
floor
and this is where the banks will
come in to meet with us
regularly and when they
came in to say we need a lot of
money and the whole point of
your book is to
make sure that we don't have
as frequent or is damaging
banking crisis as we saw in 2008
King's first
proposal is that banks insure
themselves against catastrophe
by making enough safe secure
loans so they have assets of
real value to pledge
to the central bank if they need
a cash infusion in a hurry so
that when there
is a run on the bank and
depositors lose confidence for
whatever reason it is
perfectly acceptable for the
central bank to pay the cash to
the banking
system as a short-term line king
second proposal is also simple
force the banks
to keep enough cash on hand
to cover loans gone bad
thanks did not have
enough equity finance
so when you say equity you mean
the cushion of the the bank's
own money
you know the shareholders own
funds which are available to be
able to absorb
losses without defaulting on the
loans which banks have taken out
whether from
other bits of the financial
sector or from you and eyes
depositors when a bank
fails to would be able to return
money to its depositors or other
people from
which is borrowed
then the bank fails and you get
into a problem of potential
development
the last question i asked King
the day of the brexit vote was
this in how much
danger is the world banking
system at the moment
on a scale of one to ten I add
so depends on the time scale i
think in
terms of the current immediate
problems in only three four five
but if you say to me do I think
we're going to avoid a serious
problem in the
next decade
then I think the answer is
probably not that it's much more
like seven or eight
and does he still get the same
scores now that the UK has voted
to exit the EU
I don't think the vote makes any
significant difference to the
risks
facing the global banking system
there were and are significant
risks in that system because of
the potential
fragility of our banks and
because of the state of the
world economy but I
really don't think that the
brakes it vote itself really
makes any significant
difference as he adds it may not
make any significant difference
to the
long-term future of
Europe's economies
despite the chopped in the
currency and stock markets at
the moment
The Economist have a habit of
being pretty resilient in the
longer run when
people and countries want to
trade with each other they find
ways to do so and
i'm sure that will happen now
this is economics correspondent
Paul Solman reporting from the
UK and now
from back in the US of A
now a new documentary lays out a
sobering view about the use of
cyberwarfare a future that's
accelerated since intelligence
agencies sabotage
Iran's nuclear program
the film called zero days opens
in more than a dozen cities
tomorrow and will be
available online its director
stop by as part of the recent
AFI docs festival
jeffrey Brown has our
conversation the 2010 cyber
attack on an Iranian nuclear
facility dub Stuxnet the first
question was what exactly was
this sophisticated
weapon
the second who created and
carried it out and in the years
since many new
questions have arisen about
cyber warfare and the new world
we live in the
new documentary 0 days post
together what happened with
Stuxnet and since
Alex give me academy
award-winning documentary maker
of numerous films
joins me now welcome to you
thank you why was this is
subject you wanted to tackle it
seemed like it was a
story that this was was about
the internet and the
militarization of the
internet was not properly
understood and I certainly
didn't understand it so it
may be want to dig in
remind us briefly what Stuxnet
was and how you figured out a
way to to capture
it
Stuxnet was a piece of malware
that was a self-replicating so
it didn't you
didn't have to click on it in
order to cause it to spread from
computer to
computer but it was unique in
the sense that it crossed the
threshold from the
cyber realm to the physical
realm and it was introduced into
the Iranian nuclear
facility and the tones and it
took over the machines there
that control the
centrifuges and cause the
centrifuges to spin wildly out
of control until they
blew up
but interestingly it had an
ocean's 11 kind of component
which then relayed a
message to the engineers that
all was well so it's so
tremendous doubt in the
minds of the people at the tones
so there's the beginning first
part of your
film is this detective story
you go to cybersecurity experts
and i want to show one clip
we're two of them
are sort of trying to figure out
what it is and where it might be
what it might
be aimed
let's look at that it spread to
any windows machine in the
entire world
you know we had these
organizations inside the united
states were in charge
of industrial control
facilities same were infected
what's gonna happen we didn't
know if there was a deadline
coming up where
this threat would trigger and
suddenly were like turn off all
you know an
electricity plants around the
world or it would start shutting
things down or
launching some attack
we knew that sucks there could
have very dire consequences and
we were very
worried about what the payload
contained and there was an
imperative speed that
we have to race and try and
you repeat this ticking bomb
eventually we're able to find
this discs a little bit more
solid around was the
number one infected country in
the world that immediately
raised our eyebrows
we have never seen a threat
before where was predominantly
in i rap how you
capture something
like this right there
these aren't these are bombs
that go boom these are things we
can't see this
is the digital world
we had three approaches that
really helped us tell the story
one is we had
to detectives it became a
detective story and our two
detectors were the
cybersecurity as experts from
symantec and they let us through
the the weaponry
step at a time and so it
revealed things like a detective
story
- we work in partnership with a
great special effects and
graphics company
called frame store our main
character is a piece of code but
we made it live and
breathe is if you're inside and
we used elements of the real
code so it's a
hundred percent accurate
terms of how we portrayed it
the last thing was we did have a
number of people who came
forward to reveal
information that
it was classified
that was a kind of a shocking
nature in order to protect their
identity we came
up with a means of a kind of
cyber generated character
yeah who spoke their words
one of the running themes
throughout the film is of course
secrecy
I don't answer that question
unfortunately i can't come and I
don't
know how to answer that
two answers before you get
started I don't know and if I
did we wouldn't talk
about anyway
no one wants to talk about that
that's right and then and that's
the nature of
this kind of a new weapons
system that you are up against
I think it goes beyond I mean we
can all accept a certain amount
of secrecy
particularly when you're
protecting agents in the field
and when human life
is at stake
but I think in the case of cyber
weapons we have a whole new
generation of
weapons it's a whole new kind of
warfare that's being practiced
in the field both
by us and against us and yet
we're not allowed to talk about
them people at a
very high level won't even admit
that there was a Stuxnet that
the US and
Israel were involved and thirdly
that we're using these offensive
cyber
weapons routinely and that they
are also being used on us that
it seemed to me
was a really big problem
some people would argue i
think that the program
Stuxnet in particular achieved
its purpose at least in the
sense of
bringing Iran to the
negotiating table
the stuxnet worm did accomplish
a very targeted short-term goal
but in its
release and we tell the story of
how and why it was released into
the world
it started a new arms race that
has destabilized the world that
it was
intended to secure and to that
end in the last part of your
film you have
various experts talking about
the potential uses against us of
these cyber
weapons how fearful
in other words are you after
watching as well I'm fearful
because i don't think
that the current administration
or the previous administration
have taken
seriously than enough the need
for a kind of international
regulatory system
the way we have with nuclear
weapons and furthermore they
seem to be emphasizing
deterrence through off ense
secret offense rather than
defense and they're
not telling us about the dangers
you know recently for example
there was a
shutdown of the Ukrainian
electrical grid
a big part of it and we're
pretty sure that it was the
result of Russian
malware a kind of new hyper of
version of of a Stuxnet well
that could happen
at any time with us and nobody
is more vulnerable than we are
because we're so
deeply connected via the
internet it's particularly
disquieting because we're
not allowed to talk about the
new film talks about it 0 days
Alex Gibney thank you
very much thank you
next to our brief but
spectacular series where
interesting people talk about
their passions tonight we hear
from actor and comedian Jim
Gaffigan
he's the star of the Jim
Gaffigan show which airs sunday
nights at 10pm on the
TV Land channel
he has become one of the most
universally appreciated voices
working
in comedy today Gaffigan speaks
to us now about where his
observational
storytelling began
what's the most common thing
people say you on the street are
you Brad pet
I was raised to seek security
my parents were children during
the Depression and security was
wearing a
coat and tie
the irony is that my brothers
and sisters that are bankers
have less job
security than me and I
tell diarrhea jokes
I knew probably similar to how
somebody when they first tried
heroin
this is PBS by the way they know
that their life has been changed
and that's
how I felt when I was on
stage making fun of myself
stand up comedy has changed
dramatically with the success of
Comedy Central and
YouTube
when I started there were people
that were comedians but there
were much more
of a riff raff of society like
the people that really couldn't
afford
therapy went in to stand up
I was kind of an oddity being
this suburban college educated
kit now I
think the norm is that many
comedians are college-educated
suburban kids
essentially the diversity of
comedy has been ruined any
creative person will
tell you that you're supposed to
write about things that you're
passionate
about or you're embarrassed
about food is a very passionate
and embarrassing
thing for me and it's also
universal and everyone eats
I mean I just eat a lot more
than other people I curse in
everyday life but i'm
not going to curse in front
of a room full of people
that's not how I kind of
I feel empowered
by shocking people
I I feel empowered by telling
them about Jesus no I feel
empowered by making
people laugh
I think a lot of observational
humor comes from annoyance
why should we make our bed you
don't tire shoes after we take
them off
why are we dragging a tree into
our living room in December like
a drunk
person
human beings are a rather
compliant species so we go along
with things that
after some thought we might
realize our kind of silly
my name is jim gaffigan and this
is my brief but spectacular take
on being a
comedian and you can find more
from our brief but spectacular
series on our
website
that's at pbs.org / news hour /
brief and now an update to
tonight's lead
story President Obama has just
made a statement on the police
shootings of
black suspects in
Minnesota and Louisiana
he spoke after arriving in
warsaw poland for a NATO summit
when incidents like this occur
there's a big chunk of our
fellow citizen ree that fields
as if because of
the color of their skin they are
not being treated the same and
that hurts
and that should trouble all of
us this is not just a black
issue
it's not just in Spanish issue
this is an American issue
you can follow our continuing
coverage of these and other
stories on our
website and tomorrow we start a
special series the end of aids
as doctors around
the world race to beat the
disease can they reach such an
ambitious goal in
some of the hardest hit places
william branham has a preview we
travel around the world to South
Africa
struggling to care for more
people with HIV than anywhere
else
these are unprecedented around
the world we have to do
something about this
san francisco which is laid out
a blueprint to get 20 new cases
by 2030
Atlanta the heart of America's
epidemic in the south where
hundreds still die
every year from AIDS
I think I have a better chance
of winning the lottery that I
have ending
aids in where we are today to a
remote island in Kenya to see
what's working
with hard-to-reach
populations and Rwanda
once the site of a genocide now
giving birth to a generation
free of HIV
we need a generation of
kids who never blame us
we never blame the country
our series on the end of AIDS
starting tomorrow on the PBS
news hour and that's
the NewsHour for tonight I'm
hari Sreenivasan and I'm Judy
Woodruff join
us online and again right here
tomorrow evening with mark
shields and David
Brooks for all of us at the
NewsHour thank you and good
night
you're watching PBS
yeah